== Spamtrap

Spamtrap is a Rails gem that protects forms from spambots through three complementary mechanisms:

- *Honeypot fields* — hidden textarea fields that real users never touch. Bots that fill them in
  are silently discarded with a <tt>200 OK</tt> response.
- *Cryptographic nonce* — an HMAC-SHA256 token binding each submission to a timestamp and client
  IP. Replayed or expired submissions are rejected before reaching the controller.
- *Field name mutation* — all form field names are AES-128-GCM encrypted on every page render,
  so bots cannot target fields by recognizable names like <tt>email</tt> or <tt>body</tt>. The
  controller remaps them back transparently; no changes to application code are required.

Each feature is opt-in and can be used independently or combined.

=== Installation

Add the following to your Gemfile:

  gem 'spamtrap'

=== Configuration

Global defaults can be set in an initializer. Per-controller or per-action options always
take precedence, including an explicit <tt>false</tt> that overrides a global <tt>true</tt>.

  # config/initializers/spamtrap.rb
  Spamtrap.nonce         = true       # require nonce on all spamtrap-protected actions
  Spamtrap.nonce_timeout = 15.minutes # default 1800 seconds (30 minutes)
  Spamtrap.mutate        = true       # mutate field names on all protected forms

These settings are read at request time, so changes take effect immediately without
restarting the server.

=== Honeypot

A hidden textarea is added to the form with a deliberately enticing name. Real users never see
or interact with it (it is hidden via CSS). Spambots, which auto-fill all visible and hidden
fields, will populate it. When the form is submitted with a non-empty honeypot field, spamtrap
silently discards the submission and returns a <tt>200 OK</tt> response — indistinguishable
from a successful submission to the bot.

Declare the controller actions you want protected:

  class CommentsController < ApplicationController
    spamtrap :sarah_palin_walks_with_dinosaurs, only: %i(create update)
  end

Add the honeypot field to your form using the <tt>f.spamtrap</tt> form builder helper:

  - form_for @comment do |f|
    = f.spamtrap :sarah_palin_walks_with_dinosaurs, class: 'reindeer_jerky'
    %fieldset
      = f.label :body
      = f.text_area :body
    = f.submit

Hide it from real users with CSS:

  .reindeer_jerky { display: none; }

The macro accepts an optional block for advanced use cases, such as swapping the honeypot with
a real form parameter at runtime.

=== Replay Attack Protection (Nonce)

The nonce is an HMAC-SHA256 digest of the form submission timestamp and the client IP address,
keyed with <tt>Rails.application.secret_key_base</tt>. Submissions with an expired or tampered
nonce are silently discarded with a 200 response.

Enable globally via the initializer, or per-controller:

  spamtrap :sarah_palin_walks_with_dinosaurs, nonce: true, only: %i(create update)

Add the nonce fields to your form:

  - form_for @comment do |f|
    = f.spamtrap :sarah_palin_walks_with_dinosaurs, nonce: true, class: 'reindeer_jerky'

Override the timeout for a specific action (accepts seconds or an ActiveSupport duration):

  spamtrap :field, nonce: true, nonce_timeout: 15.minutes, only: %i(create)

Note: because the nonce binds to the client IP, users whose IP address changes between page load
and form submission (e.g. mobile network handoffs) will be rejected. This is an acceptable
trade-off for spam protection but may not suit all deployments.

=== Field Name Mutation

Every field is encrypted with AES-128-GCM using a random per-render salt, so field names are
unrecognizable in HTML source and change on every page load. The controller decrypts and remaps
them transparently before the action runs — no changes to
<tt>params.require(...).permit(...)</tt> or any other controller code required.

Enable globally via the initializer, or per-controller:

  spamtrap :sarah_palin_walks_with_dinosaurs, mutate: true, only: %i(create update)

Pass <tt>mutate: true</tt> to <tt>f.spamtrap</tt> in your view:

  - form_for @comment do |f|
    = f.spamtrap :sarah_palin_walks_with_dinosaurs, mutate: true
    = f.label :body
    = f.text_area :body
    = f.label :email
    = f.email_field :email
    = f.submit

The rendered HTML will contain opaque encrypted field names (~28 characters each) instead of
<tt>body</tt>, <tt>email</tt>, etc. The encryption key is derived from
<tt>secret_key_base</tt> so only the originating server can decrypt submissions.

Mutation can be combined with the nonce for full replay and bot protection:

  spamtrap :field, mutate: true, nonce: true, only: %i(create update)

  = f.spamtrap :field, mutate: true, nonce: true

Mutation propagates automatically to <tt>fields_for</tt> nested builders, so nested
attributes forms are mutated at every level without any additional configuration.

=== License

(The MIT License)

Copyright (c) 2010-2026 Cedric Howe

Permission is hereby granted, free of charge, to any person obtaining
a copy of this software and associated documentation files (the
'Software'), to deal in the Software without restriction, including
without limitation the rights to use, copy, modify, merge, publish,
distribute, sublicense, and/or sell copies of the Software, and to
permit persons to whom the Software is furnished to do so, subject to
the following conditions:

The above copyright notice and this permission notice shall be
included in all copies or substantial portions of the Software.

THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED 'AS IS', WITHOUT WARRANTY OF ANY KIND,
EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY, FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE AND NONINFRINGEMENT.
IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHORS OR COPYRIGHT HOLDERS BE LIABLE FOR ANY
CLAIM, DAMAGES OR OTHER LIABILITY, WHETHER IN AN ACTION OF CONTRACT,
TORT OR OTHERWISE, ARISING FROM, OUT OF OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE
SOFTWARE OR THE USE OR OTHER DEALINGS IN THE SOFTWARE.
